docs: add guide for `httpResource` (#61993)
angular/angular: adev/src/content/guide/http/http-resource.md

# Reactive data fetching with `httpResource`

IMPORTANT: `httpResource` is [experimental](reference/releases#experimental). It's ready for you to try, but it might change before it is stable.

`httpResource` is a reactive wrapper around `HttpClient` that gives you the request status and response as signals. You can thus use these signals with `computed`, `effect`, `linkedSignal`, or any other reactive API. Because it's built on top of `HttpClient`, `httpResource` supports all the same features, such as interceptors.

For more about Angular's `resource` pattern, see [Async reactivity with `resource`](/guide/signals/resource).

> ## `Using httpResource`

Reviewer: Yeah, that's a good idea. Maybe something like

```markdown
Tip: Make sure to include `provideHttpClient` in your application providers. See [Setting up HttpClient](guide/http/setup) for details.
```

> You can define an http resource by returning a url: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can define an HTTP resource by returning a url: 
```
nit: we should consistently capitalize "HTTP" when not part of an identifier

```ts
userId = input.required<string>();

user = httpResource(() => `/api/user/${userId()}`); // A reactive function as argument
```

`httResource` is reactive, meaning that whenever one of the signal it depends on changes (like `userId`), the resource will emit a new http request. 

> If a request is already pending, the previous one gets canceled. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a request is already pending, the resource cancels the outstanding request before issuing a new one.
```

The following example uses Zod to parse and validate the response from the [StarWars API](https://swapi.dev/). The resource is then typed the same as the output type of Zod’s parsing.

```ts
const starWarsPersonSchema = z.object({
  name: z.string(),
  height: z.number({ coerce: true }),
  edited: z.string().datetime(),
  films: z.array(z.string()),
});

export class CharacterViewer {
  id = signal(1);

  swPersonResource = httpResource(
    () => `https://swapi.dev/api/people/${this.id()}`,
    { parse: starWarsPersonSchema.parse }
  );
}
```

## Testing an httpResource

Because `httpResource` is a wrapper around `HttpClient`, you can test `httpResource` with the exact same APIs as `HttpClient`. See [HttpClient Testing](/guide/http/testing) for details.

The following example shows a unit test for code using `httpResource`.

```ts
TestBed.configureTestingModule({
  providers: [
    provideHttpClient(),
    provideHttpClientTesting(),
  ],
});

> const id = signal(0);
> const mockBackend = TestBed.inject(HttpTestingController);
> const res = httpResource(() => `/data/${id()}`, {injector: TestBed.inject(Injector)});
> TestBed.tick(); // Triggers the effect
> const req1 = mockBackend.expectOne('/data/0');
> req1.flush(0);
> 
> // Ensures the values are propagated to the httpResource
> await TestBed.inject(ApplicationRef).whenStable();
> 
> expect(res.value()).toEqual(0);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const id = signal(0);
const mockBackend = TestBed.inject(HttpTestingController);
const response = httpResource(() => `/data/${id()}`, {injector: TestBed.inject(Injector)});
TestBed.tick(); // Triggers the effect
const firstRequest = mockBackend.expectOne('/data/0');
firstRequest.flush(0);

// Ensures the values are propagated to the httpResource
await TestBed.inject(ApplicationRef).whenStable();

expect(response.value()).toEqual(0);
```
nit: I try to avoid abbreviations for identifier names

- `​​headers()` — with the response’s headers
- `statusCode()` — with the response’s status code
- `progress()` — with the progress of the request (if required in the request object)

## Response parsing and validation

When fetching data, you may want to validate responses against a predefined schema, often using popular open-source libraries like [Zod](https://zod.dev) or [Valibot](https://valibot.dev). You can integrate validation libraries like this with `httpResource` by specifying a `parse` option. The return type of the `parse` function determines the type of the resource's `value`.

The following example uses Zod to parse and validate the response from the [StarWars API](https://swapi.dev/). The resource is then typed the same as the output type of Zod’s parsing.

```ts
const starWarsPersonSchema = z.object({
  name: z.string(),
  height: z.number({ coerce: true }),
  edited: z.string().datetime(),
  films: z.array(z.string()),
});

export class CharacterViewer {
  id = signal(1);

  swPersonResource = httpResource(
    () => `https://swapi.dev/api/people/${this.id()}`,
    { parse: starWarsPersonSchema.parse }
  );
}
```

## Testing an httpResource

> Because `httpResource` is a wrapper around `HttpClient`, you can test `httpResource` with the exact same APIs as `HttpResource. See [HttpClient Testing](/guide/http/testing) for details.

Reviewer 2: Just a small note.. could this be a typo?
The phrase “the exact same APIs as HttpResource” might have meant HttpClient, since httpResource wraps it and the linked guide is for HttpClient testing. @JeanMeche

# Data fetching with `httpResource`

IMPORTANT: `httpResource` is [experimental](reference/releases#experimental). It's ready for you to try, but it might change before it is stable.

Fetching data is by nature an asynchronous task. You can use a [`Resource`](/api/core/resource) to perform any kind of async operation.

<!-- mention reactive ?-->

`httpResource` is built on top of the `resource` primitive and uses `HttpClient` as loader. It acts as a frontend for `@angular/common/http`. It makes HTTP requests through the Angular HTTP stack, including interceptors. 

## Reactive HTTP requests  

`httpResource` makes a reactive HTTP request and exposes the request status and response value as a [`WritableResource`](/api/core/WritableResource). By default, it assumes that the backend will return JSON data. Like `resource`, it configures a reactive request. If any of the source signals in the request computation change, a new HTTP request will be made.

You can define an http resource by returning a url: 

```ts
userId = input.required<string>();

user = httpResource(() => `/api/user/${userId()}`); // A reactive function as argument
```

> IMPORTANT: `httpResource` differs from the `HttpClient` as it initiates the request eagerly (unlike the `HttpClient` `Observable`-based requests which must be subscribed).

Reviewer: Yeah, just a typo in my suggestion
